Good morning.
So I am here-- I'm, of course,
here to talk about programming
for the Mac OS X 64-bit API,
or more correctly,
to talk a little bit about
Apple's direction with
respect to 64-bit computing,
and then hand things over to
our esteemed engineering team,
who is going to give us a
lot more detail about this.
First things first, why 64-bit?
I think the key thing that we
see is access to more memory
than you can imagine for now.
That's always an embarrassing remark,
of course.
640K used to be more memory
than some people could imagine,
and 16 exabytes may seem
like that someday as well.
I hope I'm not introducing
the 128-bit API session.
But we do see a number
of reasons for this.
In some cases,
you're going to see increased
performance for memory-intensive tasks.
Now,
I will say that all other things equal,
your programs are likely
going to run slow in 64-bit,
but all other things are
not always equal here.
One of the great things is that you have
access to a lot more physical memory,
a lot more virtual memory,
and we think there are
some benefits of that.
And obviously,
one of those is that physical memory
is considerably faster than disk.
I think the other one is that you can
be lazier programmers in some instances,
because it's going to be a lot
easier to access this large
amount of memory on the system.
Our 64-bit goals are quite simple.
We want to provide the key
benefits of 64-bit computing for
the people who need it the most,
while making sure that we actually
don't break any of these 12,000 native
applications that we have today.
And we talk a lot about
this internally as a goal.
We want to make sure that people
in scientific computing and high
performance computing and media have
access to these benefits of 64-bit.
But we don't want educational software
vendors with very simple titles for
children to have to actually redo
everything because we've decided
to move into the 64-bit world.
So our objective is one that
really stresses compatibility
and performance for the native
applications on the system.
And 64-bit is an addition.
And you'll hear more today
about why we're able to do that
in our 64-bit architecture,
but I think it's a unique advantage
that Apple has with Mac OS X.
We started the 64-bit
journey already with Panther.
We had actually system access.
We had access to greater than 4 gigabytes
of physical memory in a machine.
But all of the applications that
you could write were 32-bit.
All of the user tasks were 32-bit.
And that's the address
space you had as developers.
All applications, however,
could in Panther actually use
64-bit hardware math functions.
There were 64-bit registers.
You did have to recompile your binaries
to actually take specific advantage
of the PowerPC G5 architecture,
but those were features you could get.
And once again,
this is something that distinguishes
Apple's 64-bit architecture
from other applications.
So we're going to talk
about that in a little bit.
But the 64-bit story from some
of the other platforms is that
many of the performance benefits
of 64-bit computing are actually
available to 32-bit applications
today on Mac OS X if you're going to
bother to actually do the recompile
and optimization for PowerPC G5.
But with Tiger, we actually want to take
it to another level,
and we're actually adding 64-bit
addressing for user tasks.
We're going to focus our 64-bit support
initially on the applications that we
think are most likely and most urgently
need to benefit from 64-bit addressing.
And so we think these are going
to be scientific applications,
rendering and computational engines,
and server applications.
And the infrastructure we're
providing to do that is actually
based on a 64-bit lib system and
64-bit capabilities in the compiler.
So that actually concludes,
briefly and mercifully,
the marketing portion of
this morning's presentation.
And I'm actually very pleased to
hand this over to Nick Kledzik,
who's going to talk more
about 64-bit architecture.
Thanks, Nick.
Thank you, Wiley.
One of the things Wiley mentioned
was that 64-bit computation
was already available to 32-bit
applications on Panther today.
And I want to start off by going
into detail on what that means.
When you think about 32-bit,
64-bit computing,
there are actually four aspects of that.
So the first is you need a
processor with 64-bit registers.
The second,
you need to be able to actually load
and store the 64-bit registers to
main memory in single instructions.
Next, you need a 64-bit ALU,
which is the computation unit of the CPU,
so that you can do 64-bit
multipliers and shifts and so forth.
And lastly,
if you happen to use one of those
64-bit registers to access memory,
that you actually,
the kernel has set up a
64-bit address space for you.
Now, the first three of those four points
are already available in Panther today.
You can take your 32-bit app and take
advantage of the full 64-bit registers.
You can do 64-bit loads and stores in
the app to make them a little bit faster.
And you can take advantage
of the 64-bit ALU.
If your application happens to be
64-bit integer computation intensive,
you can do all those things but
not have 64-bit address space
and get a performance boost.
Another way of looking at this
is all we're introducing in
Tiger is 64-bit address spaces.
Thank you.
So next I'd like to talk a bit
about how 64-bit was implemented in
PowerPC because it is a lot different
than how some other microprocessors
have added 64-bitness to their line.
PowerPC is kind of unique in that
PowerPC started out as a 64-bit
architecture way over 15 years ago,
whenever it started.
Only now we've finally seen the
fruition of the full 64-bitness.
Another interesting thing about
it is that there is no mode.
Some other processors,
you have a 32-bit mode and a 64-bit mode.
And when you're in those different modes,
you have different sensor registers
and different sensors of instructions.
It's almost as if it's two
processors merged into one,
and there's some big switch
as to which way you're doing.
One of the downfalls of that
is that in the implementation
of a process that model,
the implementers have to make
the decision of how to microcode
each of those instructions.
And they tend to make the 64-bit
one faster and the 32-bit one
at the cost of the 32-bit.
PowerPC does not have that problem.
There is no mode on
PowerPC between 64-bit and 32-bit.
It is completely a software convention,
whether you're doing 64-bit or 32-bit.
And I want to go into some more details
on this because once you get this,
the rest of the 64-bit talk and
how Apple is rolling out 64-bits
will make a lot more sense.
If you played around the
PowerPC instruction set,
you'll know that this
being a risk processor,
that there's basically two
categories of instructions.
There's load and store
instructions and everything else.
Now, load and store instructions
simply are the only instructions
that can access main memory.
All they do is move between
memory and registers.
All other instructions
operate with registers.
For instance,
add R3 to R4 and store it back in R3.
If you look at those instructions
and what they do with registers,
you notice there's no size
designation on those instructions.
There's no add byte or add word.
There's simply the add instruction,
which works on the entire register.
So how that works is,
say you want to do 32-bit math
or you are a 32-bit program.
You only ever load the
32 bits of the register.
You do your addition or whatever,
and you only ever look at the
low 32 bits as the result.
What that allows you to do is
that a program written to 32-bit
conventions has no concept of whether
or not there's actually higher bits.
What this means is when
the PowerPC came out,
even though it was a 64-bit architecture,
the original silicon only supported
the low 32 bits of registers.
All the software written only
looked at the 32-bit registers,
the low 32 bits,
because that's all there was.
But they followed that convention.
When the D5 came out,
there happened to be
more bits of it there.
The programs only load the low 32 bits.
It doesn't really matter
what's in the high bits.
They can be completely garbage.
They still do the same add instruction,
and the result,
they only look at the low 32 bits.
So what this means is there
is no mode with PowerPC.
It's only conventions that distinguish
64-bit from 32-bit processes.
Another way of looking at this is
that there's no performance penalty
for running as a 32-bit process.
In fact, as we'll learn later,
there's a slight performance
gain for running as a 32-bit.
Now, those of you who have done assembly
programming also know that there's
something called condition codes.
So you've got this mental model
of how you can run within 32-bit
conventions on 64-bit processor.
But you may ask, "Well,
how are the condition codes set?" Now,
condition codes are things like
the carry bit and the zero bit.
They are set as a side
effect of some instructions.
So you do the add.
If there was a carry out from the add,
the carry bit will be set.
Or if you do an add and
the result was zero,
the z-bit is set.
There is one tiny bit of
modiness in the PowerPC.
And that is,
there's a mode of how the condition codes
are set as a result of an instruction,
whether the processor looks at the
full 64-bits or the low 32-bits.
So when the kernel starts a process,
it looks at the code in the process
and basically a flag on the header
and decides whether this piece
of PowerPC code is using 30-bit
conventions or 64-bit conventions.
If it's using 32-bit conventions,
it sets a little flag on the PowerPC.
It says, when you set condition
codes for this thing,
because it's using 32-bit conventions,
it's only looking at low 32-bits,
so the condition code should only
look at the low 32-bits as well.
The one other thing the kernel does
different when launching a 32-bit versus
64-bit process is for a 32-bit process,
it also tells the MMU,
the memory management unit,
to ignore the high 32-bit addresses
because they're potentially garbage
and to only look at the low 32-bit.
That gives a 32-bit process a
4-gig address space and a 64-bit
process the full 16 exabytes.
So what are some of the trade-offs
for compiling for 64-bits?
Because now you have the choice
of whether to compile your same
PowerPC instructions using 32-bit
conventions or 64-bit conventions.
Well,
since we all know 32-bit conventions
and what they mean today,
let's talk about the trade-offs
of changing to 64-bit conventions.
Well, there's the obvious advantage that
you now got a huge address space.
And if you have lots of data
and you need that address space,
then this is the advantage
you want to go for.
Another advantage is if you
are using 64-bit computations,
64-bit integer computations,
but you don't need the
full address space,
one of the limitations of using
the 32-bit calling conventions is
that none of the functions know
about the high 32 bits of registers.
What that means is when you compile
today and you tell our GCT compiler
that you're building for the G5 and
you want to optimize for the G5,
Whenever in any leaf function,
the compiler will basically make use of
the full 64 bits within that function.
The compiler cannot do that when
it crosses function boundaries.
That is,
if a function calls another function,
The compiler has to worry that function
may trash some upper bits of registers,
so therefore it doesn't use 64-bit
conventions within that function.
Now,
once you switch to 64-bit conventions,
you know that it's safe to basically
use all bits of the registers.
So there are a small
category of applications that
don't need a lot of data,
don't need a large address space,
but because they use a
lot of 64-bit arithmetic,
can take advantage of
compiling for 64-bit mode.
So what's the disadvantage
of compiling for 64-bit mode?
As I said before, the instructions are
exactly the same on PowerPC,
no matter which way you compile.
But the difference is pointers
are bigger in 64 bits.
They're 64 bits.
But what that means is every
data structure you have that has
a pointer in it is now bigger.
Overall, that means the data in
the application is bigger.
When the data in the
application is bigger,
that means you need to
take up more address space,
which means you need more pages
and RAM to run your process.
On one hand,
you can put more RAM on the machine,
that solves that problem.
But there's also the L1 and
L2 caches in the processor.
And they try to cache the most recently
used data from the entire address space.
Well,
if your data set for your app is larger
because your pointers are larger,
the chances of your data being
in the cache is slightly less.
So there will be a small decrease in
performance for compiling for 64 bits.
So therefore,
it only makes sense to compile for 64
bits if you actually find that you have,
you're running into limits
of a 4-gig address space.
Thanks.
Another disadvantage is since
this is all conventions,
is any libraries you depend
on also have to be available
with the 64-bit conventions,
otherwise you can't call them.
So you have to wait until everything
below you has been converted to
64-bits before you can convert.
Now that I've explained a
bit how the PowerPC works and
how there's no 64-bit mode,
now I want to explain how we're
going to actually roll out 64 bits.
Let me explain what
we're not going to do.
There is not going to be a 64-bit
Mac OS X and a 32-bit Mac OS X.
There's only going to be Mac OS X.
When you happen to run on a G5,
the kernel will recognize it and allow
programs that are marked as using
64-bit conventions to be launched,
and they'll be set up with
64-bit address spaces.
For "Tiger," all Apple is committing
to at this point is that lib system
will be available to 64-bit programs.
Lib system is the standard C library
and most of the POSIX functionality,
which means command line applications
and applications with no UI will be able
to convert to 64 bits if they so choose.
Over time,
Apple will be rolling out more libraries.
And one of the things we want
to hear back from you is,
what library should we do first?
What are most important to you?
You being the people first
converting to 64 bits.
Now I want to go into
a little more detail.
Now you've got the big picture of how
64-bit processing works with PowerPC.
How we're actually
going to roll this out.
The most interesting thing
is the last point here.
We're going to have a single kernel.
The single kernel is going
to be a 32-bit kernel.
We can do this because of
the PowerPC architecture.
It's just conventions.
A 32-bit kernel can
launch a 64-bit process.
The single kernel has
a number of advantages.
First of all,
it means we can produce one disk
that can boot on any machine.
Second, it means all the existing kernel
extensions and device drivers
that are all written to 32-bit
conventions will still run within it.
Some of you may have heard
the term LP64 for data models.
That is the convention that we
have chosen to adopt for 64-bit
calling conventions on Mac OS X.
Now, I want to go through a little
bit of history of where
these acronyms came from.
Let's go back in time to the early '90s
with the pioneers of 64-bit computing,
or Cray and Alpha.
Now once they got the hardware done,
they started looking at the
C language and were like,
"Well, how big should an int
and a long be?" Well,
they were gung-ho for 64-bit,
so they said, "Well,
we're going to make an int and a long,
all 64 bits, as well as pointers."
I've actually had that rolled
out to more and more programmers,
and more and more programmers
as they use that said,
"Dang, this is hard to use,
because I've got this file format
that has 32-bit values in it,
or I just got this network
packet with 32-bit values in it.
It's really hard to get to because
there's no 32-bit type in the
C language." So when the next generation
of 64-bit processors came out for Solaris
and SGI and eventually Linux and stuff.
They all looked back at the
early pioneers and said,
"We're not going to do that.
We're going to use LP64." And LP64
longs and pointers are 64-bits,
but integers remain 32-bits.
Therefore, they have the base
types in C to have byte,
short, I mean, 8-bit, 16-bit, 32-bit,
and 64-bit types are char short,
int and long.
So that was a much
easier programming model.
And that's basically,
if you go searching for any 64-bit
clean software out there today,
you're going to see all of it
is written to the LP64 model.
Now, the next thing that happens is
once all these acronyms came out,
OP64, ILP64 and stuff, people said, well,
what do we call the old 32-bit model?
So the old 32-bit model
got renamed as ILP64,
which is integers, longs,
and pointers are all 32 bits.
Well, then some of the 32-bit processors
got jealous of the 64-bit
computation available and said,
well,
we want a 64-bit type in the C language.
So a bunch of different compiler
vendors added extensions,
and eventually it got standardized
and ratified in C99 as long-long.
Then they had the problem of, well,
what does long-long
mean in LP64 and ILP64?
Well, just to make it easy, they said,
well, it's just the same as long.
So long-long is 64 bits
across all compilers.
You also may have heard recently that
Windows has announced Windows 64.
Now,
they decided to take a different path.
After looking through the source code,
they decided that they had
too many cases where they had
hard code along to be 32 bits.
So rather than adopting
the industry standard LP64,
they came up with a new
model they call P64,
which only pointers change
in size to be 64 bits.
All the other integer
types remain the same.
So those of you who are investigating
64 bits and have code you need to
compile both for Mac OS X or the
UNIX world and the Windows world,
you have a bit of a conundrum.
Turns out it's not that bad.
If all you do is avoid
using the raw long type,
you're fine, because ints are the same
between LP64 and P64,
and long longs are the same.
As you'll learn later in the talk,
using the raw types is kind
of problematic to begin with.
Now the ABI.
We had a chance to re-examine
the PowerPC ABI for the 64-bit
because we need to come up
with a new 64-bit convention.
And there's no reason why we
had to be compatible anyway
with the old 32-bit conventions.
So we did as much analysis as we could on
how the old calling conventions worked,
how parameters were passed
in registers and so forth.
And we wanted to come up with the
optimal convention for 64-bits.
What we decided was the
original 32-bit was pretty darn
good and hard to improve on.
found a few edge cases
where we could improve.
So we did that for 64-bits.
The first is when you pass
structs that contain floats.
The old convention was
not very efficient.
We've improved that for 64 bits.
The second reason we made returns of
structs a little bit more efficient.
And last thing is we
decided to dedicate R13,
which was previously a
non-volatile register,
to be owned by the OS and in fact
owned by the threading package.
So R13 will be unique per thread.
This allows faster Pthread access.
In particular, thread local storage will
be faster on 64 bits.
Next,
we need to update the file format we use.
For those of you who've actually looked
at the details of the Mac OS file format,
you'll see that it uses 32-bit
offsets everywhere in the file.
We decided that in the long term,
people writing 64-bit code do so because
they're going to have large amounts
of data and large amounts of code,
and a 32-bit offset or 4-gig limitation
on the file size might be an issue.
So we're going to be enhancing
the Mac OS file format to
allow larger than 4-gig files.
The key point to all this
is that it's going to be
completely transparent to you.
Next thing is,
some of you may be thinking, "Well,
if there's no mode on the PowerPC,
I could be clever and write some function
that happens to work both for 64-bit
callers and 32-bit callers." And yes,
you can come up with some trivial
examples where that works,
but as soon as you do
anything interesting,
that breaks down.
So we're recommending and we're
adding no support for mixing 32-bit
and 64-bit code in the same process.
And the way we do that is
our tools will mark all code,
even though it's just
PowerPC instructions,
will mark it with whether it's using
32-bit or 64-bit calling conventions.
How we're going to do this is something
we call fat libraries or fat binaries.
Some of you may have seen
different incantations of this
concept of fatness before.
I want to contrast this with some other
OSes that when they introduced 64-bit,
say for instance,
you put all your libraries
in /usr/lib as some OSes do.
When 64-bit came out,
they had two libraries with the
same names and they couldn't
put them in the same directory,
so they came up with a new directory,
/usr/lib/64.
And basically they kept all
the 64-bit and all the 32-bit
binaries in separate directories,
and that's how they kept track of them.
We're doing something different.
We're leveraging the fat technology,
and this is how it works.
On the right-hand side there,
you see a normal Mac OS file,
which starts with a
small header which marks,
in this case the calling conventions,
32-bit PowerPC is PPC,
and then has the text and
data needed for that file.
We also allow you to create
FAT files and our tools will
do this for you automatically.
Or you can use a lipo tool to
pack these things together.
All it is,
at the beginning it has a table of
contents that says here's all the sub
files or some images in this file and
they're appended one after another.
This allows you to chip one
file that has both 32-bit and
a 64-bit implementation in it,
either a library or a main executable.
If a user takes that and
runs it on a 32-bit system,
well, the 32-bit version of the app
will be run and they'll be
limited to the 4G address space.
If they take that and run that
on a "Tiger" or later machine,
on a G5 or greater machine,
the OS will automatically pick the
64-bit version of the file and run that.
I just want to have a little fun
here to talk about what does the
64-bit address space really mean?
It's pretty easy to say,
but how big is it?
So imagine, if you will,
you took a tip of your
pen and made a little dot.
Let's call that one bit.
So let's say right next to it
you tried to pack around seven
other dots to make a byte.
It's a few millimeters on the side.
Now, if you extended that and
tried to draw actually four
billion of these little bytes,
how big of a surface area would that be?
Well, it turns out to be roughly
the surface of the roadway and
sidewalks of the Golden Gate Bridge,
including the approaches.
So we've spent our professional
career in the 32-bit world
basically playing around an area
the size of the Golden Gate Bridge.
So what does 64-bit means
with that same scale?
Well, 64 bits is actually the
surface of the Earth.
It's not quite, that would be 65 bits,
but it's actually twice the surface area
of all the land masses on planet Earth.
So basically,
you can get lost in 64 bits.
It's big.
Now, how are we going to divvy
up the 64-bit address space?
Well, first thing to remember is
the kernel is going to set up,
depending on which calling
conventions you work,
which convention is 32-bit or 64-bit,
whether you have a 64-bit
or 32-bit address space.
All the existing binaries will load in
the 32-bit address space and still have
the same restrictions they've always had.
64-bit, you can load anywhere in that
64-bit address space and have
access to the entire 64 bits.
Now, one thing we're contemplating doing
is some of you may know that we
currently have this thing called
the zero page where the first 4K
of a 32-bit process is mapped to
be neither readable or writable.
And that catches a lot of null pointer
or simple offsets off of null pointers.
So we're considering doing the same
thing for the 64-bit address space,
but instead we'll actually
[Transcript missing]
So let's get down into how you
actually compile for 64-bits.
So in Xcode, in the inspector,
there's now a new attribute here.
I'm not sure if it's big enough to read,
but it says "Architectures." That's
new for the preview you have of Xcode.
In the architecture fields,
you can type "PPC64." That is our
token to denote that you're using the
64-bit calling conventions for PowerPC.
If you're using GCC,
you can say -arc pbc64
from the command line.
Now I want to talk a bit about what
is actually in the 64-bit on the
preview you guys received this week
and what we're going to have by
the time Tiger is done for 64-bits.
So first of all,
the kernel currently does not support
the full 64-bit address space.
It only supports basically 2 million
times the 4 gig address space.
That's still-- you'll have
a hard time filling that up.
The second is the only compiler we
have for 64-bit is the C compiler.
When we should find it,
we'll also have the
C++ compiler available.
Some of you may ask, "Well,
what about Objective-C?"
That's actually easy
to do in the compiler.
The problem is, as I said earlier,
we're only committing to
lib system being available.
And our Objective-C runtime relies
heavily on the foundation frameworks,
and we haven't committed yet to when
the foundation framework will be
available using 64-bit conventions.
So we're not going to release the
compiler yet until that's done.
Next thing is GDB can
actually debug 64-bit programs
already with this preview.
The assembler and the static
linker can create them.
But what it creates are static
versions of executables.
These executables cannot
load any libraries.
If just one image is loaded in,
that's it.
For "Tiger" final,
we're no longer going to support
these static executables and only
going to support dynamic executables.
For this release,
the file format we're using is
a standard Mac OS file format,
which means it's limited to 32 bits,
and which means that your 64-bit
processors will load in the low 4 gig.
We haven't done that trick
yet of mapping it out.
By the time "Tiger" goes final,
we'll have an updated file format
in which you can load your XCubeable
anywhere in the 4-gig address space.
Lastly, because of the difference
between static and dynamic,
Xcode is only going to support building
standalone static PPC64 executables,
not FAT.
And finally,
you'll be able to build FAT binaries.
And of course,
the whole point of this preview is
for you to evaluate 64-bit to start
playing with it and give us feedback.
Once "Tiger" is final,
then the programs you make
on the final "Tiger" you can
ship and Apple will support.
Let me summarize here.
G5 is a unique 64-bit processor.
There is no mode.
All the instructions
are exactly the same.
The only difference between
32-bit and 64-bit executables
is conventions they use.
Again, because once you switch to 64-bit,
your data structures are bigger,
you're going to have a
slight performance decrease.
For that reason,
the only reason you should convert
to using 64-bit calling conventions
is if you actually need more
than 4 gig of address space.
We're using the architecture part
of our FAT builds to enable a
mixture of both 32-bit and 64-bit
calling conventions of PowerPC code,
and we're calling the new thing PBC64.
And lastly, we're only committing
to shipping LibSystem as
available for 64-bit programs.
So you need to work around that.
And again, the programs you build on this
preview will not run on Tiger Final.
It's purely for evaluation.
So next,
I'd like to bring up Jeff Glasson,
who's going to give you
a short demo of 64-bit.
Thanks, Nick.
What I wanted to show is I wanted to
go a little bit into how to build a
64-bit service application using Xcode.
And for those of you that
were at Ted's tools overview
session on Monday afternoon,
you saw the Celestia app.
What was going on behind the
scenes there was we had this 32-bit
GUI application with a 64-bit service
application in the background.
And that application actually was
mapping 6.5 gigabytes of terrain data,
which I think we left out
that little statistic.
So it really was making use
of the 64-bit address space.
So I'm going to show that
actual service application,
how you would build that in Xcode,
and then play some games and
step through the debugger.
So let me launch Xcode.
And I'm going to do some cut and
paste to speed this up a little bit,
but you'd be doing the
same thing but typing.
So I'm going to create a new project.
And just a standard C tool.
Just call it TerraMapper,
because it's a good similar name.
Give it a second.
I think my disk spun down
while the machine was resting.
So I'm going to do this quicker.
Instead of me actually
typing in the text,
I'm going to actually add the
source file to the project quickly.
And copy it in and delete
that little template main that
came with the temp project.
Okay, so the first thing you need to do
when you're building a 64-bit app to
make sure is you want to open up the
project inspector and as Nick mentioned,
there's an architecture flag
setting and by default we
build for 32-bit conventions,
so I'm just going to
change this to PPC64.
And then close that.
And so now what I want to do,
I'm going to open up the source file,
and I'm going to set a breakpoint
at the start of-- actually,
before I do that,
I'm going to do something a little
tricky to speed this demo up.
I'm going to actually pre-allocate
three gigabytes of my address space.
Let me count the right
number of zeros here.
This is actually going to speed
things up some so we don't actually
have to read four gigabytes of
data off the disk for this demo.
Let me set a break and
then we'll build it.
Actually, let's go into the debugger.
So Nick mentioned GDB and the
Xcode UI all is 64-bit aware.
Right now, this actually is not going
to be very interesting,
so I'm going to step a couple steps.
Okay, so now let's do something
a little more clever.
So I've just pre-allocated three
gigabytes of address space.
What I want to do is where we're
going to start mapping the data,
I want to set a breakpoint there.
And now I actually have to
drop to the Xcode console,
or the GDB console here,
because I want to actually set
a condition on that breakpoint.
That is actually breakpoint two.
So what I'm going to do is set
a condition so that breakpoint's
only going to stop when my pointer
value gets above four gigabytes.
Again, I have to make sure I type
enough zeros because it's
more than I'm used to typing.
and now I can continue running.
So, the demo gods have not blessed me.
Let me try that one more time.
Sorry.
One second.
I'm going to quit and relaunch it in
case there was some stale data there.
Remember, this is preview software.
Ah, I remember what's wrong.
I forgot to give it some
command line arguments.
I actually need to go here and
actually tell it where the data is.
It's my fault, not the software's fault.
So I'm going to actually cut and
paste a whole bunch of stuff here.
Okay.
I'm just being paranoid with
ULL to make sure GDB knows that
I'm typing a 64-bit constant.
So, okay, so now we're actually reading,
reading, reading.
So it's loading about a gigabyte
since I pre-allocated three gigabytes.
Let's see.
We actually have a pretty
big value for P right now.
That's way up there in the address space.
And actually,
you can use all the features of Xcode.
You can actually look in, dereference it.
You can bring up the memory viewer,
which is under here.
Uh-oh.
I can't type.
So we actually can look at that memory.
It's not very interesting
because this is actually mapped
but hasn't been faulted in yet,
but the tools are all ready for 64 bits,
and as we move more frameworks along
the line and as we make things dynamic,
I think you'll be able to explore
and give us feedback right now.
So that's all I actually had to show.
It's not very interesting
since the GUI is not 64 bits,
and you already saw that, but with that,
I'd like to introduce Stan Chebs,
who's gonna talk a little bit
about some pitfalls with 64 bits.
Hello everybody.
So we're going to go into,
twist out and go into a little
more detail into the pitfalls and
what actually happens when you
try and do 64-bit programming.
Jeff very narrowly skated several errors
and he's actually quite lucky the demo
guys didn't ultimately smile on him
because he actually got 64-bit numbers
back when he put 64-bit numbers in.
So the kinds of things that can happen
is that the source code will need
changes because integers remain 32
bits and there's a number of practices,
long-standing practices,
that no longer work.
For instance,
integers cannot hold pointers.
That seems fairly obvious,
but in fact a lot of code will casually
assign pointers to integers expecting to
get the pointer back later on somehow.
That kind of practice won't work.
Even something as innocuous as
using a %d in a printf will not
actually show you the entire number.
And that can be very confusing
if you don't use GDB and you
try using printf for debugging.
The other things we have to
do is that casting doesn't
actually solve the problem.
There's ways to get
tricked by sign extensions.
tricked by function calls.
We'll start out by recalling Diogenes.
And Diogenes, if you remember,
was a philosopher of ancient Greece,
and one of his sticks was to wander
around with a lantern looking for
honest people and never finding any.
So since we're in the modern age,
we have a flashlight, LED flashlight,
and we're going to be looking
for honest programmers.
So, our first question:
How many programmers have
assigned a pointer to an integer?
Wow, we have a lot of honest programmers.
That's very encouraging.
But I know it's not
everybody raised their hand.
Perhaps we have some Java people in here?
So the key thing to know about
assigning the pointers to
integers is it will lose data.
It will just simply drop off the top half
of the pointer and it'll just be gone.
This is half an instruction set level.
There's no way to recover from it.
Now you can assign to
a long or a long-long.
Both of those are perfectly okay.
So with the code example we have here,
we do the malloc.
We'll assume the malloc came
back with a big pointer variable.
We assign it.
And GCC is helpful and it does
warn you that the assignment is
making an integer from a pointer,
but it doesn't tell you
that you're losing data.
It just warns you that you're
doing this without a cast.
We'll come back to casts in a moment.
So if you look at the value of the
integer variable at that point,
it's just the lower half of the pointer.
Now if you do the same
thing to a long variable,
you get the entire value.
You can assign that back
to a pointer later on.
That works.
Now, printf.
How many people use the correct
kind of printf directive for
their longs and longlongs?
So, most people will just
habitually tend to use %d,
and %d has the fatal flaw that it will
only show you an integer-sized thing.
Printf is not a magic function.
You hand it all the arguments,
but it decides what to pull off the
stack that you pass to it based on
what the printf directives tell it.
The directive says pull four bytes,
it pulls four bytes and leaves
the next four bytes for the next
thing that it's asked to print.
So you can get some
interesting behaviors.
And it can be very confusing because
if you use printf as your window into
what's happening inside the program,
and printf is not telling
you what's really happening,
you can have a situation
where the program is more
or less working correctly,
but printf says it has to be failing.
So you've got to watch out for that.
And so the directives to use,
they've always been there in C.
They've been around.
You can use %ld for a decimal printout,
or you can use %lx for the
hexadecimal print for longs.
And for long-longs,
it's always been available
to do %lld and %llx.
And then we also have %P for pointers.
The standard actually does
not define what %P does.
In our case,
it puts a 0x on the front and
prints it out in hexadecimal.
But that's actually not a
cross-platform expectation.
%P may do something different on a
Linux or a Solaris or what have you.
Now, how many people use casting?
Good, that's good.
So, casting unfortunately is not
a magical process that somehow
makes the conversion work.
All it does is tell the compiler
that you actually intended
to assign one to the other.
So, as our example here shows,
we can assign a pointer variable
to an integer variable and voila,
it whacks the top off again.
But except that this time,
the compiler hasn't
actually said anything.
It says, "Hey, hey,
you put in an int cast in there,
the programmer must know what they're
doing." So it doesn't say anything.
And again, you can do the same
thing with a long cast.
The long cast will do the right thing.
So the basic bottom line is that all
those casts you thought were going
to fix the 64-bit problem actually
aren't doing you a bit of good.
Now, signed extensions is a
little bit complicated here.
The problem is that an unsigned
64-bit number may actually look
like a signed 32-bit number.
And it's a little bit messy to set it up,
but I did check this out in the code,
so if you run back to the lab,
I'm reasonably certain that
if you type all this in,
you'll get more or less the same result.
However, we're destroying the
slides after this talk,
so you won't actually--you'll
have to work from memory.
So, to take an example,
let's take and assign 9 bajillion
to an unsigned integer variable.
So this is just above 2 gigabytes,
so if this is a signed value,
it would actually come
out as a negative number.
But we're cleaning our code,
we've made it an unsigned integer.
We can take that,
we can assign it to an unsigned long,
and the right thing happens.
But then if we take that and we
assign it to an assigned integer,
we end up with a value
that's less than zero.
And the other thing that's
interesting about that,
if you also take that less
than zero value and then
assign it to assigned long,
it's still less than zero.
So now we've taken our nice large
positive number and turned it
into a large negative number.
Now the juicy part about this is then
you go and do another assignment.
You assign it back to an unsigned long.
Okay, it now comes out as an
extremely large unsigned number.
And so if you say we're
expecting this to be,
say, a number of iterations, you know,
two billion iterations,
that's sort of plausible.
However large that number is,
that's an awful lot of iterations.
Your machine will spend quite a bit
of time getting to the end of that.
So that's kind of a
mysterious looking number,
but what it really is,
is the nine bajillion you had originally,
but it's had FFFs glued on the front.
Essentially that's just being assigned,
extended, and choose complement.
So that's where that
value really comes from.
But after a set of
transformations like this,
it's not obvious that that's where
the number really comes from.
And what you want to do is when
you're sitting in debugger and the
numbers aren't making any sense,
look at them in hexadecimal.
In a lot of cases you'll see that,
in fact, there's this sign
extension that's gone on,
the number's been turned
into a large unsigned value.
Now, another way to have bad stuff
happen is through function calls.
Now, most of you have
probably done prototypes.
Is that true?
Has everybody done prototypes
for all their functions?
How's this going?
Okay, there we go.
Everybody does prototypes
for all their functions?
They add prototypes when the system
doesn't provide the prototypes?
Fewer hands go up there.
So, this time around for 64-bit,
the prototypes really, really matter.
Because the rules of C are that
if you don't have a prototype,
it'll fall back to its defaults,
which is to pass doubles for floats,
which is usually okay,
but to pass integers for
the integer arguments.
And in particular, that's not longs.
So, and the compiler may or may
not say something about this.
So, we have here an example
of a function called fun,
where it's declared as a function,
but it doesn't have a proper prototype.
We can take a long value and
assign it to a long variable,
and that works.
And we can pass that into the function.
So,
the function calling process truncates
the integer again in a fashion
that should be familiar by now.
And if you look at the value of
the variable inside the function,
it's chopped off again.
Now, if you pass the whole constant,
it'll do the same thing.
It'll still chop it off.
In that case,
the compiler will give you a
warning that it's chopping it off,
which is a small consolation.
Okay, so we've got all these ways of
losing by getting the values cut
up in ways that you don't want.
So, how do you do it right?
I mean, what do you do?
You have often a very situation,
for instance, you have to send something
out over the wire,
you have to send something
to a 32-bit process,
and you need to preserve both
halves of your big pointer.
There's a couple different ways
to do it and I won't try and
recommend a single way because it
really depends on your situation,
your application.
One way that works reasonably
well is to use a union.
In this case we have a union
that exists only for the purpose
of splitting up a big value.
Now we have two fields union,
a long and an array of two ints.
We can assign it to the,
we can assign it, take a long variable,
assign it to the union,
and then if you look at the two
halves of the union they come out
as the two halves of the integer.
Now a downside, a hazard of this,
this is NDE-independent.
So if you're just transmitting within,
from one processor to the
same kind of processor,
this will work, or if you're doing it
within a single program.
But if you're splitting in
half and sending the two
halves over the wire to say,
"An x86 machine,
chances are the two halves
will go out wrong." And so
you need to be aware of that,
which half is which.
Because again, in traditional fashion,
you send it out over the wire,
it comes out wrong.
You sent two over the wire and
the x86 receives it as 2 times
4 gigabytes or 8 gigabytes.
And for instance,
in the header of a packet and
it's expecting 8 gigabytes of
data when you only sent two,
the x86 machine is going to be
waiting for a very long time.
On the plus side,
you can then say that's a Windows bug
and everybody will believe you.
So the other way to do that that's
more reliable if you have to pay
attention to any of this is to write
out manually the cutting up operation.
And I've written it out here
and I've tested this one too.
So again, you know,
do it from memory on a lab machine,
see if it really works and
come tell me if I got it wrong.
The game here is we need to mask off,
we want to mask off the low and
high halves of the long number.
Now to mask off the low half,
you can and it with lots of Fs.
The trick here is you need to and it with
lots of Fs with lots of leading zeros.
Okay, if I just said 0x and then 8Fs,
that would get sign extended to 0x
and 16Fs and the ampersand then would
yield a big number and then it would
be cut off to get the wrong half.
Sorry, no,
it would actually get the right half but
it would get it for the wrong reasons.
So I recommend doing it this way.
They don't have a slide actually
for this but you can actually get
into trouble if you don't add the
Ls onto the ends of your constants.
So I recommend you do that
everywhere now that you're doing,
working with 64-bit programming.
To get the high half of the number,
since we're working in a signed regime,
the correct thing to do is to do a shift.
You can shift down by 32 and in this
case we don't have to put an L on
the 32 because it's just a shift
and that will make the sign extended
correctly if you have a negative
number that you're cutting up.
And if we print F it,
we see that it's cut up in
the two halves correctly.
So what kind of assistance do we actually
give you to write compatible code?
So we have all these problems,
all these different ways to lose,
you know, what do you do?
So at the language level,
we give you some standard
types and macros.
Some of these have been
around for a long time.
We have size T, we have int PTRT,
which is an integer type that is
large enough to hold a pointer,
and that'll have the correct
type whether you're doing either
32- or 64-bit programming.
We have uint PTRT,
the corresponding type for unsigned.
There's also an N32T and an
N64T types that you can use.
For the Unix side of the world,
there's additional types
that are specific to Unix.
They're not a standard C-type.
We have things like C-Adder T,
which is the size of a Core Adder,
which is just a euphemism for
a pointer into main memory.
So that's going to be a 64-bit
type in the 64-bit world.
So we have process IDs,
Off T is for file offsets, and so forth.
If you look in the user include,
you'll see there's quite
a few of these headers.
In fact,
if you compare the Panther headers
and the Tiger headers,
you'll see a whole bunch of changes.
Those places where Panther only
had 32-bit headers.
So the obvious implication is
beware of compiling this stuff
on Panther because if you can,
if Panther didn't give
you any complaints,
the headers are different on Tiger,
and so you may see things in Tiger that
you didn't get out of Panther.
Another thing that's actually
very common for programs is that
programs have been ported to 32-bit.
Say they were on Unix systems already,
they will have their own
local definitions for types.
And there's any number of different
conventions that people use.
They'll have macros all uppercase,
they'll have funny names for them.
You'll see all kinds of
different things out there.
One source I'll recommend
is GNU software itself.
GNU has been ported
everywhere in the universe,
has been ported as native tools,
cross-compiler tools,
all that kind of stuff.
So every combination of 64 and
32-bit you can think of has
actually had to have been handled,
and there are a set of definitions in
there that have been proven over time
to work well for this kind of thing.
One of the special things that's come up,
and several people
have had to solve this,
is what to do about
these printf directives.
It turns out there's not
standard macros for these,
although it seems like
a really good idea.
So you'll see some programs will actually
define macros for the printf directives.
So I have an example here.
If you want %lld to do the right thing,
and you don't want to say
pass an integer to %lld,
because then that will grab the four
bytes of your integer and the four bytes
of the next data item passed to printf,
So you want it to
encapsulate this somehow.
And so you can do something that
amounts to using string concatenation,
which is a capability of C.
And you have part of your string,
you have the macro with
the directive in it,
and then you have the rest of the string.
And this way you can get something
so that the compiler won't give you
warnings about the printf directives
not matching up with the data types.
So, further API changes we have.
We give you a LP64 macro,
double underscores on the front
and back because it's something
predefined by the compiler.
And LP64, the value of it is 1 for 64-bit
compilation and 0 for 32-bit compilation.
We also give you a PPC64 that's defined
when you're compiling for 64-bit
PPC and is not defined for 32-bit PPC.
And there was the existing macro,
double underscore PPC,
is not defined when you're doing
64-bit PowerPC compilation.
And we had a little debate on that
and we looked at the uses in practice
and they were pretty much either/or.
It was like either you're doing 32-bit
or you're doing 64-bit and if you
turn on PPC and PPC64 at the same time
it would confuse a lot of headers.
So we decided to make
them mutually exclusive.
In practice,
you should almost never use PPC64
directly because that's going to wire
in an architecture dependency unless
you're actually literally writing
PowerPC code slipped into the middle
of C code or something like that.
You probably want to use
LP64 instead or else,
if at all possible,
write the code to be 3264 independent.
One of the things you'll see is, again,
if you look at the "Tiger" headers,
you'll see we've made a bunch
of API changes where we had
to choose whether an argument
was a long or an integer.
And so I just thumbed through and found
this little bit out of a header file
whose name I forgot to write down,
so I don't remember which one it is.
The functions get at
our list and in the old,
in the Panther headers,
the argument for them is said unsigned
long and that would have an undesirable
consequence in the 64-bit world,
so the header has been
changed to say unsigned int.
However, the programs that have their own
declarations of the same system function,
which happens,
would be inconsistent if they continue
to say unsigned long and you had
unsigned int in the system header,
so those are mostly
conditionalized on LP64.
And this way we get backwards
compatibility with Panther code that
may refer to the same prototype.
We have one little API change
for assembly language,
which is a new directive to allocate an
8-byte object and just call it ".quad".
It's not the greatest name in the world,
but it's consistent with
other assemblers that do this,
so that's why we chose it.
The dot quad here,
I'm just feeding it a large constant,
but it also works to
feed it a relocation.
That's not very interesting right now,
but when the full 64-bit
Mac OS file format is available,
you may end up wanting to
use this in assembly code.
So, I've alluded to warnings
a number of times.
Now this time, you really have to pay
attention to the warnings.
If you're getting a warning and it's
telling you about loss of precision
or casting integers to pointers,
this time around it's not just for show.
You really are going to lose
data and bad things will happen.
One of the things you can do is
to add additional compiler options
just to be on the safe side.
In Xcode, you can say,
ask for other warning flags,
which is the equivalent
of -w all for GCC users,
and that will turn on lots
of additional warnings.
And people are often annoyed.
They say, well, W-Wall,
it turns on too many warnings.
But actually,
in doing 64-bit programming,
W-Wall is actually not all,
doesn't even list all the bad
things that can happen to your code.
So we have an additional option,
the -W conversion,
which gives additional warnings
about conversions that might
possibly lose data precision.
And 64-bit,
if it says you might lose data precision,
you probably are losing data.
So we recommend using W conversion.
You can also ask for
-W require prototypes,
and there's not an Xcode
flag for it that I could see,
so send in a radar for that.
And what it does is it actually insists
that all your functions have prototypes.
So if you have a forgotten piece of code
that was always quietly taking integers
and assuming everything was okay,
-W require prototypes will
flag them for you and say,
hey, you need prototypes there.
Take a moment to talk about what
we do at Tools and Utilities.
We have an extended set of APIs and
a few new APIs to handle tools that
want to manipulate 64-bit processes,
but don't necessarily want
to be 64-bit themselves.
An obvious example is GDB.
When you run GDB in Xcode,
it's actually a 32-bit program still,
but it is manipulating a 64-bit process,
which is the program you're debugging.
So the way we do that is we have
things like a type vm_address_t in
the system headers and it's set to
a 64-bit type if PPC64 is enabled.
We also have extended
APIs such as VM Read,
which will read 64-bit addresses,
or will read data out
of the 64-bit process.
The OS guys have been slaving away
hard on this over the past few
weeks to get all that to work.
Now device drivers are running
in a 32-bit environment.
We have a 32-bit kernel and this
is partly for efficiency and partly
for to sort of have a single kernel
that runs in all types of systems.
And we can do this actually because
the representation of memory,
as you saw from the previous slide,
the representation of memory
is as data structures.
So a 32-bit compiled text can
actually manipulate the memory
going into a 64-bit task.
So specific names of the functions,
we have a prepare method that
establishes I/O mappings,
and then we have specific
routines both for use with
DMA and parallel I/O situations.
Actually, it's probably not parallel I/O,
that just shows, but I'll let it,
what's that?
Programmed I/O, thank you God for it,
yes.
I looked at it and it says, you know,
parallel I/O,
that's like 8-bit microcomputers.
That's probably not what
they meant in I/O Kit land.
Okay, so yeah, so programmed I/O,
we have read bytes and
write byte methods.
So at least for now,
and there is a possibility we may have to
do something with 64-bit device drivers,
and you have OS guys over on that side
of the room that you can buttonhole
in the Q&A period to ask about that.
Now if you're actually doing
64-bit I/O from a 64-bit process,
the same POSIX APIs work as always.
They've been essentially recompiled
to take 64-bit addresses and
all that stuff has been done.
If people have questions about
I/O KitLive and I/O User-Client
plugins which are not available,
let's bring it up in the Q&A session.
So I'd like to pop back up a little
bit and talk about the design issues
that you might want to think about.
One of the classic uses of
64-bit applications that have
become prevalent in recent years
is to use them for servers.
And servers are actually a
very interesting use because
the classic model now,
what we've seen with Internet-type
servers as the Internet's become popular,
is that they need to handle
large numbers of clients,
in some cases maybe thousands
of clients simultaneously.
And it's very convenient to actually be
able to have a very large address space
because then what you can do is have,
say, one thread per client,
and have access to a single
large shared data space.
So, for instance,
you're serving out images,
you load every last one of
your images into memory so
that it's readily available,
and you can serve it out to
clients as they ask for them.
This can actually be a very effective
approach for things like databases
where you can lock on individual data
elements and you can have a single
server managing all of those rather than
trying to do something with multiple
server processes managing shared files.
So the internet server is
a really interesting area
to do 64-bit programming.
We can generalize that a little bit and
talk about compute engines in general.
And the TerraVision demo that you saw
yesterday that Steve Peters did is
actually a classic example of that.
We have a 32-bit GUI front end.
We use inter-process communication
in one form or another going
back to the compute engine,
which is handling the
very large address space.
What this does is essentially it
can shift the burden from your
application code to the system.
A lot of programs actually
already have mechanisms to
handle large amounts of data.
What they'll do is they'll manually
page in data as needed and then page
it out and then page in different data.
And with the 64-bit capability,
you actually wouldn't
have to do that anymore.
You could just allocate large amounts
of memory and suck it in and use it and
never have to worry about running out.
And if you have a piece of data
that's not being used at the moment,
you can essentially rely on the virtual
memory system to page it out for you.
So in a sense,
what it's doing is it's replacing
your code with a system code.
And that can be a great advantage
because now it's not you having to
write all this stuff and play computer
scientist and read about VM memory items.
You can let the friendly experts
at Apple take care of that for you.
Now it may be that you know something
about your application's memory
usage that will be actually more
efficient than the generic OS can do.
And you basically have to reevaluate
that for your own application.
Do you have a usage pattern?
Do you always have something
that's always first in,
first out, and that doesn't necessarily
play nicely with the last in,
first out in the VM system?
And that's just going to depend
on you with your application.
If you already have a memory management
algorithm that you know is more efficient
than anybody else in the world can do,
then you probably want to stick
with it and maybe even stick
with using a 32-bit program and
continue to exploit your algorithm.
But it's the kind of thing you
want to actually stop a moment,
take a look at and say, you know,
is this the best algorithm or
can I leverage Apple's VM system
and get something better?
So, what 64-bit does for us is that it
really opens up a lot of new vistas.
And I've talked about a couple
of very specific things,
but they're things we already know about.
There's actually all kinds
of opportunities that we
really don't know about.
I was actually talking with one of
our guys last night and thinking about
that surface of the earth analogy.
And in fact, if you think about it,
every point on the surface of the earth
is identifiable with a 64-bit number.
So you could write an application,
for instance,
in which instead of maintaining, say,
a linked list of locations
stored as 64-bit values,
you record data about a point on
the earth at that memory address.
So essentially,
you're storing data on the earth.
You use the entire 64-bit address space.
The point under my feed, you know,
is 4589.
And you record the color of
the carpet at that location.
And you just record it directly
at that memory location.
And as you read and write that data,
the VM system will handle
the paging of that blob.
So, that's kind of exotic, right?
You know, you think about, well,
that's kind of silly.
Who would do that?
But the thing is,
that's actually something you can do and
something you couldn't do previously.
So, you know, maybe it's a good idea,
maybe it's not.
So the real bottom line in all
this is that these kinds of
applications are actually only
limited by a single application.
They're actually only
limited by your imagination.
In the final tiger,
we're going to give you the
full 64-bit address space.
And most other systems
don't give you that much.
They give you somewhat less than that.
So they give you the whole thing,
and we're actually very excited
to see what you'll think of
to do with it in the future.
So that's my part,
and I'd like to bring up Matt Formica to
do the wrap up and do the Q&A session.
And thank you very much.
So you've seen a lot of
information about 64-bit today.
There is further documentation
information available for you.
The main thing right now is the 64-bit
transition guide that's been written.
It provides kind of the state of
the world right now in Tiger with
the preview DVD that you have.
So that's the best place to get
information about what we're doing.
We're now going to
bring up our Q&A panel.
We have a bunch of engineers
who are going to come up.
You can certainly talk with us,
ask questions this week.
Beyond this week,
feel free to send me an email.
I'm the developer tools
evangelist here at Apple.
My email is mformica@apple.com.
I'd love to communicate
with you via email about the
64-bit tool set on Mac OS X.